# random-walk
An add-on to take your browser on an automated random walk through the World Wide Web.

## Applications

### Random Browsing
It's remarkable where this add-on can take you, to websites and topics you'd never ordinarily dream of visiting. Such undirected intellectual stimulation can lead to serendipitous discoveries and inspiration. Web search engines use adaptive filtering that limits search results to topics that they _believe_ are of interest to you. This bias can be helpful but can also tend to conceal broader possibilities. This add-on can potentially mitigate the search narrowing effect.

### Internet Privacy
Personal privacy is highly prized by most people but increasingly threatened by invasive technological developments and legislation. Internet search providers, social media, e-commerce and many commonly used websites gather vast amounts of data on their users' interests, postings, search terms and browsing history. It is now common knowledge that government surveillance has reached Orwellian levels far beyond reasonable consent. In the United Kingdom ISPs are required to log all Internet protocol headers as well as all telephone call details. There are some countermeasures one can take to reduce the level of information leakage, such as 'do not track' request headers, cookie control, the use of private browsing sessions, VPNs, proxy servers or the TOR network, but even these may not entirely eliminate leakage.  One additional measure is to deliberately degrade the information 'signal-to-noise' ratio in ISP browsing logs by executing random searches and randomly clicking links. This add-on automates that approach.

## Operation and Preferences
The add-on has manual and automatic modes of operation. In manual mode clicking a toolbar push-button randomly chooses one of the links on the current page and navigates to it. In automatic mode the toolbar features a toggle-button instead; while the toggle-button is in the pressed state the add-on randomly chooses a link as in manual mode, but once the page has loaded the add-on waits for a random time interval before again choosing a random link on the new page. The process repeats until the toggle-button is returned to the unpressed state. The add-on only navigates links to HTML content, avoiding links to downloadable or executable content.

There is an auto-resume preference which when enabled starts a random walk session on browser startup. In automatic mode there is another preference to start the random walk immediately. There is a preference to specify the URL of the starting page.

The algorithm for choosing random links is configurable, for example to require or prefer links to pages from other hosts or other domains. There are also configurable limits to the maximum number of successive pages from the same host and the same domain. The time interval between random clicks is configurable. While the session is active the add-on maintains a history of pages visited, which it uses to backtrack out of dead ends such as websites or domains that link only to themselves. There is also a configurable page load timeout; if the page is still loading after this interval has elapsed the add-on aborts the load and backtracks to a suitable previous page in the history. Such load timeouts are often observed on pages laden with advertisements. There is a configurable 'wildcard blacklist' of websites that the add-on will never visit - the default blacklist includes vast 'black-hole' social media sites from which there is a low possibiliity of escape (such as Facebook and Twitter) or sites that predominantly feature non-HTML media types such as video on YouTube.

If these navigation constraints cause the add-on to backtrack to the start page and fail to find any remaining navigable links, this triggers a search using a random set of search terms. The add-on randonmly chooses one of the search results to follow. The search provider is user-configurable as are the parts of speech used as search terms. Supported search providers are Google, Yahoo, Bing, DuckDuckGo and StartPage. Searches may specify between one and four search terms, each of which can be independently configured as adverb, verb, adjective and noun. Suitable words are chosen randomly from a built-in word list. Alternatively the start page may be left blank in which case the session will start from a random web search.